=for stopwords
remctl const iovec NUL-terminated argv Allbery

=head1 NAME

remctl_command, remctl_commandv - Send a command to a remctl server

=head1 SYNOPSIS

#include <remctl.h>

int B<remctl_command>(struct remctl *I<r>, const char **I<command>);

#include <sys/uio.h>

int B<remctl_commandv>(struct remctl *I<r>, const struct iovec *I<iov>,
                    size_t I<count>);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

remctl_command() and remctl_commandv() send a command to a remote remctl
server.  The remctl client object I<r>, created with remctl_new(), should
have previously been passed to remctl_open() to open a connection to the
server.

remctl_command() takes the command as a NULL-terminated array of
NUL-terminated strings (the same layout as an argv array).  This function
is most convenient when passing simple text commands.

remctl_commandv() takes the command as an array of iovec structs of length
I<count>.  This function is most convenient when passing arbitrary data to
the command, since the iovec struct takes a pointer and a length for each
chunk of data.  See writev(2) for the layout of the iovec struct.

After calling one of these functions, call remctl_output() to get the
results of the command.

=head1 RETURN VALUE

remctl_command() and remctl_commandv() return true on success and false on
failure.  On failure, the caller should call remctl_error() to retrieve
the error message.

=head1 SEE ALSO

remctl_new(3), remctl_open(3), remctl_output(3), remctl_error(3)

The current version of the remctl library and complete details of the
remctl protocol are available from its web page at
L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/remctl/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>

=cut
